[DOCS] EMT Hypervisor Docs (#512)
open-edge-platform/edge-microvisor-toolkit: docs/developer-guide/get-started/deployment/emt-vm-host-win-guest.md

# Hosting Windows 11 Guest VM under EMT Host

## Install and Setup Windows 11 VM

### Prerequisites

1. Installation Script

>    Download the required installation [script](https://github.com/intel-innersource/virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts/archive/refs/tags/rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you already have installed the required `rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip` script as part of the host setup, skip this step. Otherwise, download [the script](https://github.com/intel-innersource/virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts/archive/refs/tags/rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip).
```

>    Unzip and install the script file on host OS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Unzip and install it on the host OS:
```

   ```bash

>    $ unzip -jo rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   unzip -jo rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip
```

   ```

   If you have already installed the script as part of the host setup, skip this step.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

2. Windows ISO Image

>    Download [Windows 11 Enterprise internal test version 24H2](file://10.106.47.116/iotg-sriov/SRIOV_OS/Win11_24H2/26100.1.240331-1435.ge_release_CLIENTENTERPRISE_OEM_x64FRE_en-us.iso) into your working directory, where you unzipped the installation scripts and ran the host setup. For purpose of this guide we're assuming `/home/$USER`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Download [Windows 11 Enterprise internal test version 24H2](file://10.106.47.116/iotg-sriov/SRIOV_OS/Win11_24H2/26100.1.240331-1435.ge_release_CLIENTENTERPRISE_OEM_x64FRE_en-us.iso) into your working directory, where you unzipped the installation scripts and ran the host setup. This guide assumes `/home/$USER`.
```

### Prepare Windows VM Image

> 1. Create Symlink

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a symlink.
```

   ```bash
   # Windows 11

>    $ ln -s 26100.1.240331-1435.ge_release_CLIENTENTERPRISE_OEM_x64FRE_en-us.iso windows.iso

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ln -s 26100.1.240331-1435.ge_release_CLIENTENTERPRISE_OEM_x64FRE_en-us.iso windows.iso
```

   ```

> 2. Create empty windows image file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create an empty Windows image file:
```

   ```bash
   $ cd /home/$USER/

>    $ qemu-img create -f qcow2 win.qcow2 80G

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   cd /home/$USER/
   qemu-img create -f qcow2 win.qcow2 80G
```

   ```

3. Prepare OVMF files:

   ```bash
   $ ln -sf ovmf/OVMF_CODE.fd OVMF_CODE.fd

>    $ cp ovmf/OVMF_VARS.fd OVMF_VARS_windows.fd

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ln -sf ovmf/OVMF_CODE.fd OVMF_CODE.fd
   cp ovmf/OVMF_VARS.fd OVMF_VARS_windows.fd
```

   ```

### Install Windows VM Image

> 1. Run install_windows.sh to start Windows guest installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run `install_windows.sh` to install the Windows guest OS.
```

   ```bash
   # Start guest VM to install Windows
   $ cd /home/$USER/

>    $ sudo ./install_windows.sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   cd /home/$USER/
   sudo ./install_windows.sh
```

   ```

>    > **Note:** If you miss the “Press Any Key” message, press ESC key until you reach the EFI shell prompt, then type “reset” to start over again. Then, follow the Windows installation steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > **Note:** If you miss the “Press Any Key” message, press the "ESC" key until you reach the EFI shell prompt. Then, type “reset” to start over again. Next, follow the Windows installation steps.
```

2. Select **Install Windows 11** and click **Next**:

   ![setup1](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2025-3-11_20-48-5.png)

> 3. Select **Windows 11 IoT Enterprise**"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Select **Windows 11 IoT Enterprise**":
```

   ![setup2](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2025-3-11_20-48-59.png)

4. Select **Drive 0 Unallocated Space** and click **Next**:

   ![setup3](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2025-3-11_20-50-2.png)

5. Select **Ready to install**:

   ![setup4](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2025-3-11_20-51-6.png)

6. Follow the Windows installation steps as usual. Windows will be installed to
`win.qcow2`.

7. Once the installation is done, disable the automatic updates temporarily with the
following steps:

   a. Open **Settings**.
   b. Click **Updates & Security**.
   c. Click **Windows Update**.

>    d. Click **Pause updates for 7 days**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. Open "Settings".
   2. Click "Updates & Security".
   3. Click "Windows Update".
   4. Click "Pause updates for 7 days".
```

<!--- [SRIOV ZeroCopy Windows driver (v1797)](https://downloadmirror.intel.com/844243/ZCBuild_1797_Installer.zip)-->
<!--- [SRIOV ZeroCopy Windows driver (v1797)](https://ubit-artifactory-ba.intel.com/artifactory/gfx_sriov-ba-local/Windows_VM_Package/External/ZC_1797_Package/ZCBuild_1797_Installer.zip)-->

3. Windows 11 OS Patch 26100.3037:
   - [KB5043080](https://catalog.sf.dl.delivery.mp.microsoft.com/filestreamingservice/files/d8b7f92b-bd35-4b4c-96e5-46ce984b31e0/public/windows11.0-kb5043080-x64_953449672073f8fb99badb4cc6d5d7849b9c83e8.msu)
   - [KB5050094](https://catalog.sf.dl.delivery.mp.microsoft.com/filestreamingservice/files/2d3f9ba9-5096-4b23-9709-3af7d7a2103f/public/windows11.0-kb5050094-x64_3d5a5f9ef20fc35cc1bd2ccb08921ee8713ce622.msu)

  > **Note:** To get access to **Intel Graphics UHD Iris Xe GFX driver ver. 32.0.101.6733** and **SRIOV ZeroCopy Windows driver (v1797)**, apply for access in [Intel AGS](https://ags.intel.com/identityiq/identityRequest/identityRequest.jsf).

#### Launch Windows Guest VM and Install Drivers

> ##### Launch Windows Guest VM**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Launch Windows Guest VM
```

> From Host OS launch Windows guest VM with start_windows.sh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the host OS, launch the Windows guest VM with `start_windows.sh`.
```

```bash
# Start guest VM to install Windows drivers
$ cd /home/$USER/

> $ sudo ./start_windows.sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cd /home/$USER/
sudo ./start_windows.sh
```

```

##### Download and install Windows 11 OS patches in correct order

> 1. Double click on the **KB5043080** *.msu file to start the installation. After successful installation reboot the Windows Guest VM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Double click the **KB5043080** .msu file to start the installation. After successful installation, reboot the Windows Guest VM. 
```

2. Double click on the **KB5050094** *.msu file to start the installation. After successful installation reboot the Windows Guest VM.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Use the same procedure for the **KB5050094** .msu file.
```

<!--3. Open a command prompt in administrator mode and enter “winver” to check the

> version. It should show 21H2 OS Builds 19044.4412.-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!--3. Start Command Prompt in administrator mode and enter “winver” to check the
version. It should show 21H2 OS Builds 19044.4412.-->
```

##### Install GFX Graphics Driver

1. Download [Intel Graphics UHD Iris Xe GFX driver ver. 32.0.101.6733](https://dl.dell.com/FOLDER13027935M/2/Intel-Graphics-UHD-Iris-Xe-Graphics-Driver_VFN34_WIN64_32.0.101.6733_A04.EXE)

> 2. Use File Explorer to navigate to the downloaded .exe file, then double click it to launch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Use File Explorer to navigate to the downloaded .exe file, then double click it to launch it.
```

3. Click **INSTALL** and follow the prompts.

4. Click the **Begin Installation** button:

> ![setup5](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/begin.PNG)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ![setup5](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/begin.PNG)
```

<!--2. Use File Explorer to extract the zip file

3. Navigate into the install folder and double click on installer.exe to launch the
installer.

> 4. Click the Begin installation button.-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!--2. Use File Explorer to extract the zip file.

3. Navigate into the installation folder and double click installer.exe to start it.

4. Click the "Begin Installation" button.-->
```

5. After the installation is completed, reboot the Windows guest VM:

> ![setup6](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/reboot.PNG)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ![setup6](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/reboot.PNG)
```

> 6. Launch the Device Manager to verify the installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Launch Device Manager to verify the installation.
```

> 7. Expand the Display adapters item in the device list as shown in Figure 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Expand the "Display adapters" item in the device list.
```

Which image is Figure 2?

> 8. Right-click on the graphics device and select Properties. Click Drivertab. Check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Right-click on the graphics device and select "Properties". Click the "Driver" tab. Verify
```

that the Intel® Graphics version is 32.0.101.6733.

<!--> **Note:** If you see the yellow triangle with exclamation, please install the driver manually by selecting the 32.0.101.5972 version. (Right-click to update the driver and select the

> option to point to the main installation directory.)-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- > **Note:** If you see the yellow triangle with exclamation, install the driver manually by selecting the 32.0.101.5972 version. Right-click to update the driver and select the
option to point to the main installation directory.-->
```

##### Install SR-IOV Zero Copy Driver

1. Download Windows Zero Copy Drivers Release 1797 [DVServer, DVServerKMD] [SRIOV ZeroCopy Windows driver (v1797)](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/download/844242/844243/display-virtualization-drivers-for-arrow-lake-uh-arrow-lake-s.html)

   Please make sure the correct ZCBuild version is chosen from the drop-down. By

>    default, the latest ZCBuild version will be the first one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Make sure the correct ZCBuild version is chosen from the drop-down. By
   default, the latest ZCBuild version will be the first one.
```

2. Use File Explorer to extract the .zip file.

   The SR-IOV Zero Copy Driver can be installed either with the GUI installer or through
   the command line.

**Install SR-IOV Zero Copy Driver Using GUI Installer**

1. Go to the directory containing **ZeroCopyInstaller**.

2. Double-click the **ZeroCopyInstaller** to run it.

> 3. Click on the Install button when prompted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Click on the "Install" button when prompted.
```

> 4. Once the installation has completed, click on the Finish button to restart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Once the installation has completed, click on the **Finish** button to restart
```

Windows.

**Install SR-IOV Zero Copy Driver Using Command Line**

1. Open Powershell in administrator mode.

2. Navigate to the directory containing **ZeroCopyInstaller**.

3. Enter the following command to perform the installation:

```shell
C:\> .\ZeroCopyInstaller.exe /VERYSILENT /SUPPRESSMSGBOXES

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
   ```shell
   C:\> .\ZeroCopyInstaller.exe /VERYSILENT /SUPPRESSMSGBOXES
   ```
````

> **Note:** Option usage details:
    - `/VERYSILENT` Runs silently without displaying windows
    - `/SUPPRESSMSGBOXES` Suppresses message boxes from displaying

>     - `/NORESTART` Avoids restarting the system after installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `/VERYSILENT` runs silently without displaying windows.
    - `/SUPPRESSMSGBOXES` suppresses message boxes from displaying.
    - `/NORESTART` avoids restarting the system after installation.
```

> 4. Wait forthe Windows guest to automatically restart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Wait for the Windows guest to automatically restart.
```

**Verify SR-IOV Zero Copy Driver Installation**

> 1. Launch the Device Manager to verify the installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Launch **Device Manager** to verify the installation.
```

2. Expand the **Display adapters** item in the device list, as shown below:

> ![setup6](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image2022-10-20_18-5-36.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ![setup6](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image2022-10-20_18-5-36.png)
```

3. Verify that **DVServerUMD Device** and  **VServerKMD driver** are loaded properly.

4. In Task Manager, verify that the **GPU** tab is showing correct information.

#### Disable Graphics Driver Updates

##### Identify the Graphics Hardware ID

> 1. Launch the Device Manager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Launch Device Manager.
```

> 2. Expand the Display adapters item in the device list:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Expand the **Display adapters** item in the device list:
```

> ![setup7](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2023-8-14_11-26-2.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ![setup7](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2023-8-14_11-26-2.png)
```

3. Right click on the graphics device and select **Properties**.

4. Switch to the **Details** tab and select **Hardware IDs** from the **Property** pull down list.

![setup8](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2023-8-14_11-26-19.png)

> 5. Right click on the second ID in the list and select **Copy** from the context menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Switch to the "Details" tab and select "Hardware IDs" from the "Property" dropdown list.

   ![setup8](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2023-8-14_11-26-19.png)

5. Right click on the second ID in the list and select "Copy" from the context menu.
```

##### Enable Group Policy Disabling Graphics Driver Update

> 1. In the windows search bar type `gpedit.msc` and launch the Group Policy Editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the Windows search bar type `gpedit.msc` and launch the Group Policy Editor.
```

2. On the left pane, navigate to **Computer Configuration** -> **Administrative Templates** -> **System** -> **Device Installation** -> **Device Installation Restrictions**

![setup9](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2023-8-14_11-29-27.png)

3. On the right pane, double click **Prevent installation of devices that match any of these device IDs** to display additional configuration options.

![setup10](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2023-8-14_11-29-42.png)

4. In the new pop-up window, click the **Enabled** radio button.

![](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2023-8-14_11-29-59.png)

5. Clicking **Show…** will bring up a new window. Enter the device hardware ID copied earlier:

![](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2023-8-14_11-30-24.png)

> 6. Click **OK** in all the dialog windows to disable graphics driver updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. On the left pane, navigate to "Computer Configuration" -> "Administrative Templates" -> "System" -> "Device Installation" -> "Device Installation Restrictions"

   ![setup9](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2023-8-14_11-29-27.png)

3. On the right pane, double click "Prevent installation of devices that match any of these device IDs" to display additional configuration options.

   ![setup10](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2023-8-14_11-29-42.png)

4. In the new pop-up window, click the "Enabled" radio button.

   ![](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2023-8-14_11-29-59.png)

5. Clicking "Show…" will bring up a new window. Enter the device hardware ID copied earlier:

   ![](./assets/emt-vm-host-win/image-2023-8-14_11-30-24.png)

6. Click "OK" in all the dialog windows to disable graphics driver updates.
```

>    >**Note:** To allow the graphics driver to be updated, follow the steps above but select the **Disabled** radio button instead of **Enabled**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   >**Note:** To allow the graphics driver to be updated, follow the steps above but select the "Disabled" radio button instead of "Enabled".
```

##### Resume Windows Update

Resume the automatic Windows updates (excluding Graphics driver) with the following steps:

1. Open **Settings**

2. Select **Update and Security**

3. Select **Windows Update**

> 4. Click the **Resume Updates** button

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open "Settings"
2. Select "Update and Security"
3. Select "Windows Update"
4. Click the "Resume Updates" button
```

## Configuration Options for Running Windows Guest VM

### Changing Guest VM Memory and Number of CPUs

> The default launch command without any parameters is for 2 cores and 2G RAM. You can change that with startup parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default launch command without any parameters is for 2 cores and 2GB of RAM. You can change that with startup parameters:
```

> Example guest start configuration for 4 cores, 4G RAM:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is an example of guest start configuration for 4 cores and 4GB of RAM:
```

```bash
# Add -m option to specify 4G of memory
# Add -c option to specify 4 cpu cores for guest VM

> $ sudo -E ./start_windows.sh -m 4G -c 4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Add -m option to specify 4GB of memory
# Add -c option to specify 4 CPU cores for guest VM
sudo -E ./start_windows.sh -m 4G -c 4
```

```

#### Enabling USB Devices in Windows Guest VM**

For Windows guest VMs, USB devices can be setup in two ways:

1. Passthrough of all USB Host Devices

>    USB host passthrough parameter option can be added in the launch command to passthrough all USB devices on the USB host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The USB host passthrough parameter can be added in the launch command to passthrough all USB devices on the USB host.
```

>    Add an additional parameter to the Guest VM launch command as shown below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Specify an additional parameter to the Guest VM launch command as shown below.
```

   ```bash
   # Note: all connected USB devices will be passthrough to the
   guest VM with USB host passthrough option

>    $ sudo -E ./start_windows.sh --passthrough-pci-usb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   # guest VM with USB host passthrough option
   sudo -E ./start_windows.sh --passthrough-pci-usb
```

   ```

> 2. Passthrough of Selected USB Devices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Passthrough of selected USB devices.
```

   An external command option can be used to passthrough only a few selected USB devices.

>    Retrieve the vendorid and productid of USB device. In this example, `046d` is vendor ID, `c06a` is product ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Retrieve the "vendorid" and "productid" of the USB device. In this example, `046d` is a vendor ID, `c06a` is a product ID.
```

   ```bash
   # On target terminal.
   $ lsusb
   Bus 004 Device 003: ID 046d:c06a Logitech, Inc. USB Optical

>    Mouse

Reviewer: ````suggestion
   # On the target terminal.
   $ lsusb
```

Displays the following information:

```text
   Bus 004 Device 003: ID 046d:c06a Logitech, Inc. USB Optical
   Mouse
````

   ```

   Add an additonal parameter to the Guest VM launch command:

   ```bash
   # Add extra command when start guest
   $ sudo -E ./start_windows.sh -e "-device usb￾host,vendorid=0x046d,productid=0xc06a"

>    ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
   Specify an additional parameter to the Guest VM launch command:

   ```bash
   # Add extra command when starting the guest OS
   sudo -E ./start_windows.sh -e "-device usbhost,vendorid=0x046d,productid=0xc06a"
   ```
````

>    > **Note:** A passthrough device option can only be used once because a device can be passthrough to only 1 guest VM at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > **Note:** The passthrough device option can only be used once because a device can be passthrough to only one guest VM at a time.
```

> #### Enabling PCIe Wi-Fi Adapter Device in Windows Guest VM**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Enabling PCIe Wi-Fi Adapter Device in Windows Guest VM
```

> For Windows guest VMs, PCI Wi-Fi device passthrough can be setup by adding `--passthrough-pci-wifi` parameter to guest VM launch command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Windows guest VMs, PCI Wi-Fi device passthrough can be setup by adding the `--passthrough-pci-wifi` parameter to guest VM launch command:
```

```bash
# Add --passthrough-pci-wifi for passing through Wifi adapter

> $ sudo -E ./start_windows.sh --passthrough-pci-wifi

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sudo -E ./start_windows.sh --passthrough-pci-wifi
```

3. Windows 11 OS Patch 26100.3037:
   - [KB5043080](https://catalog.sf.dl.delivery.mp.microsoft.com/filestreamingservice/files/d8b7f92b-bd35-4b4c-96e5-46ce984b31e0/public/windows11.0-kb5043080-x64_953449672073f8fb99badb4cc6d5d7849b9c83e8.msu)
   - [KB5050094](https://catalog.sf.dl.delivery.mp.microsoft.com/filestreamingservice/files/2d3f9ba9-5096-4b23-9709-3af7d7a2103f/public/windows11.0-kb5050094-x64_3d5a5f9ef20fc35cc1bd2ccb08921ee8713ce622.msu)

4. Windows VirtIO Drivers:
   - [https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/latest-virtio/](https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/latest-virtio/)
   - [https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/archive-virtio/virtio-win-0.1.271-1/virtio-win-gt-x64.msi](https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/archive-virtio/virtio-win-0.1.271-1/virtio-win-gt-x64.msi)

   > **Note:** To get access to **Intel Graphics UHD Iris Xe GFX driver ver. 32.0.101.6733**
   and **SRIOV ZeroCopy Windows driver (v1797)**, apply for access in **Intel AGS**.

>    Remember to setup the proxy settings if operating from behind a corporate firewall.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > **Note:** To get access to **Intel Graphics UHD Iris Xe GFX driver ver. 32.0.101.6733**
   > and **SRIOV ZeroCopy Windows driver (v1797)**, apply for access in **Intel AGS**.
   > Remember to setup the proxy settings if operating from behind a corporate firewall.
```
